docs: describe new Hetzner Robot integration (#568)
hetznercloud/hcloud-cloud-controller-manager: docs/robot.md

# Clusters with Robot Servers

## Quickstart

Prerequisites:

- Running Cluster
- Kubectl
- Helm

> 0. Make sure that you start all Kubelets in the cluster with `--cloud-provider=external`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
0. Make sure that you start all Kubelets in the cluster with `--cloud-provider=external`.
```

1. Export credentials and create secret:

   ```bash
    export HCLOUD_TOKEN=your-hcloud-token
    export ROBOT_USER=your-robot-user-name

>     export ROBOT_PASSWORD=your-robot-password

Reviewer: Smart move, the space before the export commands!

(Will not be stored in the shell history)

   kubectl -n kube-system create secret generic hcloud --from-literal=token=$HCLOUD_TOKEN --from-literal=robot-user=$ROBOT_USER --from-literal=robot-password=$ROBOT_PASSWORD
   ```

2. Install the Helm Chart:

   ```bash

>    helm repo add hcloud https://hetznercloud.github.io/hcloud-cloud-controller-manager

Reviewer: Why not use `helm repo add hcloud https://charts.hetzner.cloud` ?

   helm repo update hcloud
   helm install hcloud/hcloud-cloud-controller-manager --set robot.enabled=true
   ```

You should now see that the Robot Server was initialized and the labels added.

## Features

Most of the features we support for Cloud servers are also supported for Robot servers:

### Node Controller

> The Node controller adds some information about the server to the Node object. The values are modified from what you usually see in the Robot interface & Webservice to better match to Cloud counterpart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Node controller adds information about the server to the Node object. The values are taken from what you usually see in the Robot interface & Webservice to better match to Cloud counterpart.
```

- Labels
  - `node.kubernetes.io/instance-type`
    - Examples: `AX41` `Server-Auction`
    - We replace any empty spaces with `-` (hyphen)
  - `topology.kubernetes.io/region`
    - Examples: `hel1` `fsn1`
    - We use the lowercase variant of the location to match the Cloud Locations
  - `topology.kubernetes.io/zone`
    - Examples: `hel1-dc5` `fsn1-dc16`
    - We use the lowercase variant of the location to match the Cloud Datacenters
- Provider ID
  - We set the field `Node.spec.providerID` to identify the Robot server after the initial adoption.
  - The format is `hrobot://$SERVER_NUMBER`, but we can also read from the format used by [syself/hetzner-cloud-controller-manager](https://github.com/syself/hetzner-cloud-controller-manager): `hcloud://bm-$SERVER_NUMBER`
- Addresses

>   - We add the Hostname and (depending on the configuration & availability) the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses of the server in `Node.status.addresses`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - We add the Hostname and (depending on the configuration and availability) the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses of the server in `Node.status.addresses`.
```

  - For the IPv6 address we use the first address in the Network -> For the network `2a01:f48:111:4221::` we add the address `2a01:f48:111:4221::1`.
  - Private IPs in a vSwitch are not supported.

### Node Lifecycle Controller

The Node Lifecycle Controller is responsible for updating the shutdown status of Nodes & deleting the Kubernetes Node object if the corresponding server is removed.

Both are generally supported. The shutdown status can only be detected if the Robot Server supports this.

### Service Controller (Load Balancers)

The service controller watches Services with `type: LoadBalancer` and creates Cloud Load Balancers for them. By default, all Kubernetes Nodes including Robot servers are added as targets to the Load Balancer. Check out the [Load Balancer Documentation](./load_balancers.md) for more details.

### Unsupported

#### Routes & Private Networks

> Adding support for Routing Pod CIDRs through the (Cloud) Networks & (Robot) vSwitches is not currently supported. You will need to use your own CNI for this. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding support for Routing Pod CIDRs through the (Cloud) Networks and (Robot) vSwitches is not currently supported. You will need to use your own CNI for this. 
```

> If you are interested in this, we are looking for contributors to help design & implement this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you are interested in this, we are looking for contributors to help design & implement this.
```

## Requirements

### Identifying the correct Server

> When a new Node joins the cluster, we first need to figure out which Robot (or Cloud) Server matches this node. We primarily try to match this through the Node Name & the Name of the server in Robot. If you use Kubeadm, the Node Name by default is the Hostname of the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new Node joins the cluster, we first need to figure out which Robot (or Cloud) Server matches this node. We primarily try to match this through the Node Name and the Name of the server in Robot. If you use Kubeadm, the Node Name by default is the Hostname of the server.
```

> _This means that by default, your **Hostname** needs to be the same of the **name of the server in Robot**_. If this does not match, we can not properly match the two entities. Once we have made this connection, we save the Robot Server Number to the field `spec.providerId` on the Node, and use this identifier for any further processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_This means that by default, your **Hostname** needs to be the **name of the server in Robot**_. If this does not match, we can not properly match the two entities. Once we have made this connection, we save the Robot Server Number to the field `spec.providerId` on the Node, and use this identifier for any further processing.
```

If you absolutely need to use different names in Robot & Hostname, you can also configure the Provider ID yourself. This can be done on the `kubelet` through the flag [`--provider-id`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/). You need to follow the format `hrobot://$SERVER_NUMBER` when setting this. If this format is not followed exactly we can not process this node.

## Config Options

### Credentials

You need to add your Robot credentials into the secret `hcloud`:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: hcloud
  namespace: kube-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  token: your-hcloud-token
  robot-user: your-robot-user-name
  robot-password: your-robot-password
```

> If you only plan to use a single Robot server, you can also use an "Admin login" for this server instead of the account credentials.

Reviewer: What does "Admin login" refer to ? Do we have link?

Author: Its a concept in the Robot product. You can create a unique username+password that can only access a single server. There is no public documentation for this besides one mention [here](https://docs.hetzner.com/robot/general/overview).

Its what we use for the e2e tests, to avoid passing the full account credentials into the pipeline.

Author: ![screenshot-admin-login](https://github.com/hetznercloud/hcloud-cloud-controller-manager/assets/3393079/8612ea84-b677-487f-95e0-da1c109551c5)

Screenshot from robot.hetzner.com/server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you only plan to use a single Robot server, you can also use an "Admin login" (see the `Admin login` tab on the server administration page) for this server instead of the account credentials.
```

If you have previously used the Hetzner Cloud Controller Manager by Syself, you can migrate to hcloud-cloud-controller-manager. We have tried to keep the configuration & features mostly the same and backwards compatible, but there are some changes you need to be aware of.

### Configuration

#### Secret Name

The secret is called `hcloud` in hcloud-cloud-controller-manager, while it was called `hetzner` before. Make sure to create the new secret before migrating your deployment.

#### Enable Robot Support

It is now required to explicitly enable support for Robot features. This is done by setting the environment variable `ROBOT_ENABLE=true` on the container, or by setting the value `robot.enabled: true` in the Helm Chart.

### Feature & behaviour changes

#### Provider ID

The format of the Provider ID changed from `hcloud://bm-$SERVER_NUMBER` to `hrobot://$SERVER_NUMBER`. For compatibility, we still read from the `hcloud://bm-` prefix, but any new nodes will have the `hrobot://` prefix.

If you read from this value, you should amend your parsing for the new format.

#### Load Balancer Targets

> We changed the behaviour to now remove any Robot Server targets from the Load Balancer, even if Robot support is not enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We remove any Robot Server targets from the Load Balancer, even if Robot support is not enabled.
```

I don't really understand this. What are the condition to remove the server target ?

Author: - Now: If HCCM does not know about the target -> remove it.
- In HCCM previously: If the target is a cloud server & HCCM does not know about it -> remove it.
- In syself fork: If Robot support is not enabled, crash when reconciling LB targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, any Robot Server targets are removed from the Load Balancer, even if Robot support is not enabled.
```

# Clusters with Robot Servers

## Quickstart

Prerequisites:

- Running Cluster
- Kubectl
- Helm

0. Make sure that you start all Kubelets in the cluster with `--cloud-provider=external`.

> 1. Export credentials and create secret:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Export your credentials and create a secret:
```

   ```bash
    export HCLOUD_TOKEN=your-hcloud-token
    export ROBOT_USER=your-robot-user-name
    export ROBOT_PASSWORD=your-robot-password
   kubectl -n kube-system create secret generic hcloud --from-literal=token=$HCLOUD_TOKEN --from-literal=robot-user=$ROBOT_USER --from-literal=robot-password=$ROBOT_PASSWORD
   ```

2. Install the Helm Chart:

   ```bash
   helm repo add hcloud https://charts.hetzner.cloud
   helm repo update hcloud
   helm install hcloud/hcloud-cloud-controller-manager --set robot.enabled=true
   ```

> You should now see that the Robot Server was initialized and the labels added.

Reviewer: Which labels are added where? As newcomer this is not obvious.

Author: The labels are described in the section _Node Controller_, I will add a link.

## Features

Most of the features we support for Cloud servers are also supported for Robot servers:

### Node Controller

The Node controller adds information about the server to the Node object. The values are changed from what you usually see in the Robot interface & Webservice to better match the Cloud counterpart.

- Labels
  - `node.kubernetes.io/instance-type`
    - Examples: `AX41` `Server-Auction`
    - We replace any empty spaces with `-` (hyphen)
  - `topology.kubernetes.io/region`
    - Examples: `hel1` `fsn1`
    - We use the lowercase variant of the location to match the Cloud Locations
  - `topology.kubernetes.io/zone`
    - Examples: `hel1-dc5` `fsn1-dc16`
    - We use the lowercase variant of the location to match the Cloud Datacenters
- Provider ID
  - We set the field `Node.spec.providerID` to identify the Robot server after the initial adoption.

>   - The format is `hrobot://$SERVER_NUMBER`, but we can also read from the format used by [syself/hetzner-cloud-controller-manager](https://github.com/syself/hetzner-cloud-controller-manager): `hcloud://bm-$SERVER_NUMBER`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The format is `hrobot://$SERVER_NUMBER`, but we can also read from the deprecated format used by [syself/hetzner-cloud-controller-manager](https://github.com/syself/hetzner-cloud-controller-manager): `hcloud://bm-$SERVER_NUMBER`
```

- Addresses
  - We add the Hostname and (depending on the configuration and availability) the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses of the server in `Node.status.addresses`.
  - For the IPv6 address we use the first address in the Network -> For the network `2a01:f48:111:4221::` we add the address `2a01:f48:111:4221::1`.
  - Private IPs in a vSwitch are not supported.

### Node Lifecycle Controller

The Node Lifecycle Controller is responsible for updating the shutdown status of Nodes & deleting the Kubernetes Node object if the corresponding server is removed.

> Both are generally supported. The shutdown status can only be detected if the Robot Server supports this.

Reviewer: Do we have more details about which server handle this? I remember that this is about the age of the server?

Author: From the design doc: 

> Shutdown status is not available for server types using a tower case, this mostly affects older models

I did not find this information in the public Robot docs, nor did I find a list on which server models support it.

_This means that by default, your **Hostname** needs to be the **name of the server in Robot**_. If this does not match, we can not properly match the two entities. Once we have made this connection, we save the Robot Server Number to the field `spec.providerId` on the Node, and use this identifier for any further processing.

If you absolutely need to use different names in Robot & Hostname, you can also configure the Provider ID yourself. This can be done on the `kubelet` through the flag [`--provider-id`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/). You need to follow the format `hrobot://$SERVER_NUMBER` when setting this. If this format is not followed exactly we can not process this node.

## Config Options

### Credentials

You need to add your Robot credentials into the secret `hcloud`:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: hcloud
  namespace: kube-system
type: Opaque
stringData:
  token: your-hcloud-token
  robot-user: your-robot-user-name
  robot-password: your-robot-password
```

> If you only plan to use a single Robot server, you can also use an "Admin login" (see the `Admin login` tab on the [server administration page](https://robot.hetzner.com/server))for this server instead of the account credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you only plan to use a single Robot server, you can also use an "Admin login" (see the `Admin login` tab on the [server administration page](https://robot.hetzner.com/server)) for this server instead of the account credentials.
```
